Whither wander you?
Over hill, over dale, thoroughbush, thorough brier,
over park, over pale, thoroughflood, thorough fire,
I do wander everywhere swifterthan the moon's sphere.
And I serve the fairy queen, todew her orbs upon the green.
The cowslips tall her pensionersbe.
In their gold coats spots yousee.
Those be rubies, fairy favours.
In those freckles live theirsavours.
I must go seek some dewdropshere
and hang a pearl in everycowslip's ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits.
I'll be gone.
Our queen and all her elves comehere anon.
The king doth keep his revelshere to-night.
Take heed the queen come notwithin his sight,
for Oberon is passing fell andwrath,
because that she as herattendant
hath a lovely boy stolen from anIndian king.
She never had so sweet achangeling.
And jealous Oberon would havethe child knight of his train
to trace the forests wild,
but she perforce withholds theloved boy,
crowns him with flowers andmakes him all her joy.
Either I mistake your shape andmaking quite,
or else you are that shrewd andknavish sprite
called Robin Goodfellow.
Thou speakest aright.
I am that merry wanderer of thenight.
I jest to Oberon and make himsmile
when I a fat and bean-fed horsebeguile,
neighing in likeness of a fillyfoal.
And sometimes lurk I in agossip's bowl,
in very likeness of a roastedcrab.
And when she drinks, against herlips I bob
and on her withered dewlap pourthe ale.
The wisest aunt, telling thesaddest tale,
sometime for three-foot stoolmistaketh me.
Then slip I from her bum.
Down topples she.
But, room, fairy, here comesOberon.
Ill met by moonlight, proudTitania.
What?
Jealous Oberon.
Fairies, skip hence.
I have forsworn his bed andcompany.
Tarry, rash wanton.
Am not I thy lord?
Then I must be thy lady,
but I know when thou hast stolenaway from fairy land
and in the shape of Corin satall day playing on pipes of corn
and versing love to amorousPhillida.
Why art thou here, come from thefarthest steppe of India,
but that, forsooth, the bouncingAmazon,
your buskin'd mistress and yourwarrior love
to Theseus must be wedded,
and you come to give their bedjoy and prosperity.
How canst thou thus for shame,Titania,
glance at my credit withHippolyta,
knowing I know thy love toTheseus?
Didst thou not lead him throughthe glimmering night
from Perigenia, whom heravished?
And make him with fair Aeglebreak his faith,
with Ariadne and Antiopa?
These are the forgeries ofjealousy.
And never, since the middlesummer's spring,
met we on hill, in dale, forestor mead,
by paved fountain or by rushybrook,
or in the beached margent of thesea,
to dance our ringlets to thewhistling wind,
but with thy brawls thou hastdisturbed our sport.
Therefore, the wind, piping tous in vain as in revenge,
have sucked up from the seacontagious fogs,
which falling in the land,
have every pelting river made soproud
that they have overborne theircontinents.
The ox hath therefore stretchedhis yoke in vain,
the ploughman lost his sweat,
and the green corn hath rottedere his youth attained a beard.
The fold stands empty in thedrowned field,
and crows are fatted with themurrion flock.
The nine men's morris is filledup with mud,
and the quaint mazes in thewanton green for lack of tread
are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want theirwinter cheer.
No night is now with hymn orcarol blessed.
Therefore, the moon, thegoverness of floods,
pale in her anger, washes allthe air
that rheumatic diseases doabound.
And thorough this distemperaturewe see the seasons alter,
hoary-headed frosts far in thefresh lap of the crimson rose,
and on old Hiems' thin and icycrown,
an odorous chaplet of sweetsummer buds
is, as in mockery, set.
The spring, the summer, thechilding autumn,
angry winter, change theirwonted liveries,
and the mazed world, by theirincrease,
knows not now which is which.
And this same progeny of evilscomes from our debate,
from our dissension.
We are their parents andoriginal.
Do you amend it then?
It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross herOberon?
I do but beg a little changelingboy to be my henchman.
Set your heart at rest.
The fairy land buys not thechild of me.
His mother was a votaress of myorder.
And, in the spiced Indian air bynight,
full often hath she gossiped bymy side
and sat with me on Neptune'syellow sands,
marking the embarked traders onthe flood
where we have laughed to see thesails
conceive and grow big-belliedwith the wanton wind, which she,
with pretty and with swimminggait following--
her womb then rich with my youngsquire--
would imitate and sail upon theland
to fetch me trifles and returnagain as from a voyage,
rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of thatboy did die.
And for her sake do I rear upher boy.
And for her sake, I will notpart with him.
Give me that boy.
Not for thy fairy kingdom.
Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if Ilonger stay.
Well, go thy way.
Thou shalt not from this grovetill I torment thee for thisinjury.
My gentle Puck, come hither.
Thou rememberest since once Isat upon a promontory
and heard a mermaid on adolphin's back
uttering such dulcet andharmonious breath
that the rude sea grew civil ather song
and certain stars shot madlyfrom their spheres
to hear the sea-maid's music.
I remember.
That very time I saw, but thoucouldst not,
flying between the cold moon andthe earth,
Cupid all armed.
A certain aim he took at a fairvestal throned by the west
and loosed his love-shaftsmartly from his bow
as it should pierce a hundredthousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid'sfiery shaft
quenched in the chaste beams ofthe watery moon,
and the imperial votaress passedon, in maiden meditation,
fancy-free.
Yet marked I where the bolt ofCupid fell.
It fell upon a little westernflower,
before milk-white, now purplewith love's wound.
And maidens call itlove-in-idleness.
Fetch me that flower, the herb Ishewed thee once.
The juice of it on sleepingeyelids laid
will make all man or woman madlydote
upon the next live creature thatit sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thouhere again
ere the leviathan can swim aleague.
I'll put a girdle round aboutthe earth in forty minutes.
Having once this juice,
I'll watch Titania when she isasleep
and drop the liquor of it in hereyes.
The next thing then she wakinglooks upon,
be it on lion, bear, or wolf, orbull,
on meddling monkey, or on busyape,
she shall pursue it with thesoul of love.
And ere I take this charm fromoff her sight,
as I can take it with anotherherb,
I'll make her render up her pageto me.
Who comes here?
I am invisible, and I willoverhear their conference.
Where is Lysander and fairHermia?
Thou toldest me they were stolenunto this wood.
Hence, get thee gone and followme no more.
Do I entice you?
Do I speak you fair?
Or rather, do I not, in plainesttruth,
tell you I do not, nor I cannot,love you?
And even for that do I love youthe more.
I am your spaniel.
And, Demetrius, the more youbeat me,
I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel;spurn me; strike me;
neglect me; lose me.
Only give me leave, unworthy asI am, to follow you.
What worser place can I beg inyour love--
and yet a place of high respectwith me--
than to be used as you use yourdog?
Tempt not too much the hatred ofmy spirit,
for I am sick when I do look onthee.
And I am sick when I look not onyou.
You do impeach your modesty toomuch
to leave the city and commityourself
into the hands of one that lovesyou not,
to trust the opportunity ofnight and the ill counsel of adesert place
with the rich worth of yourvirginity.
Your virtue is my privilege.
For that it is not night when Ido see your face.
Therefore, I think I am not inthe night,
nor doth this wood lack worldsof company,
for you, in my respect, are allthe world.
Then how can it be said I amalone
when all the world is here tolook on me?
I will not stay thy questions.
Let me go.
Or, if thou follow me, do notbelieve
but I shall do thee mischief inthe wood.
Ay, in the temple, in the town,the field, you do me mischief.
Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal onmy sex.
We cannot fight for love as menmay do.
We should be wooed and were notmade to woo.
I'll run from thee, and hide mein the breaks,
and leave thee to the mercy ofwild beasts.
I'll follow thee and make aheaven of hell,
to die upon the hand I love sowell.
Fare thee well, nymph.
Ere he do leave this grove,
thou shalt fly him, and he shallseek thy love.
Hast thou the flower there?
Welcome, wanderer.
Ay, there it is.
I pray thee, give it me.
I know a bank where the wildthyme blows,
where oxlips and the noddingviolet grows
quite over-canopied withluscious woodbine,
with sweet musk-roses and witheglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime ofthe night,
lulled in these flowers withdances and delight.
And there the snake throws herenamelled skin,
weed wide enough to wrap a fairyin.
And with the juice of this, I'llstreak her eyes
and make her full of hatefulfantasies.
Take thou some of it and seekthrough this grove.
A sweet Athenian lady is in lovewith a disdainful youth.
Anoint his eyes,
but do it when the next thing heespies may be the lady.
Thou shalt know the man by theAthenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care,
that he may prove more fond onher
than she upon her love.
Sing me now asleep
then to your offices and let merest.
You spotted snakes with doubletongue.
Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen.
Newts and blind-worms, do nowrong.
Come not near our fairy queen.
Come not near our fairy queen,
our fairy queen.
Philomel, with melody, sing inour sweet lullaby.
Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla,lulla, lullaby.
Never harm, nor spell nor charm,
come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night with lullaby.
So good night
with lullaby, lullaby, lullaby.
Weaving spiders, come not here.
Hence, you long-legged spinners,hence.
Beetles black, approach notnear.
Worm nor snail, do no offense.
Philomel, with melody, sing inour sweet lullaby.
Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla,lulla, lullaby.
Never harm, nor spell nor charm,
come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night with lullaby.
So good night
with lullaby, lullaby, lullaby.
Hence, away.
Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.
What thou seest when thou dostwake,
do it for thy true-love take,
love and languish for his sake,
be it ounce, or cat, or bear,pard,
or boar with bristled hair
in thy eye that shall appearwhen thou wakest,
it is thy dear.
Wake when some vile thing isnear.
Fair love, you faint withwandering in the wood.
And to speak troth, I haveforgot our way.
We'll rest us, Hermia, if youthink it good,
and tarry for the comfort of theday.
Be it so, Lysander.
Find you out a bed, for I uponthis bank will rest my head.
One turf shall serve as pillowfor us both,
one heart, one bed, two bosomsand one troth.
Nay, good Lysander,
for my sake, my dear, liefurther off.
Do not lie so near.
Oh, take the sense, sweet, of myinnocence.
Love takes the meaning in love'sconference.
I mean, that my heart unto yoursis knit
so that one heart we can make ofit,
two bosoms interchained with anoath
so then two bosoms and a singletroth.
Then by your side no bedroom medeny.
For lying so, Hermia, I do notlie.
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners andmy pride
if Hermia meant to say Lysanderlied.
But, gentle friend, for love andcourtesy lie further off.
In human modesty,
such separation as may well besaid
becomes a virtuous bachelor anda maid.
So far be distant.
And, good night, sweet friend.
Thy love ne'er alter till thysweet life end.
Amen, amen to that fair prayer,say I.
So end life when I end loyalty.
Here is my bed.
Sleep give thee all his rest.
With half that wish, thewisher's eyes be pressed.
Through the forest have I gone,
but Athenian found I none onwhose eyes I might approve
this flower's force in stirringlove.
Night and silence.
Who is here?
Weeds of Athens he doth wear.
This is he, my master said,despised the Athenian maid.
And here the maiden sleepingsound on the dank and dirtyground.
Pretty soul,
She durst not lie near thislack-love, this kill-courtesy.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw allthe power this charm doth owe.
When thou wakest, let loveforbid.
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
So awake when I am gone, for Imust now to Oberon.
Stay, though thou kill me, sweetDemetrius.
I charge thee, hence, and do nothaunt me thus.
Oh, wilt thou darkling leave me?
Do not so.
Stay, on thy peril.
I alone will go.
Oh, I am out of breath in thisfond chase.
The more my prayer, the lesseris my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er shelies,
for she hath blessed andattractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright?
Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftenerwashed than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear.
For beasts that meet me run awayfor fear.
Therefore no marvel thoughDemetrius do
as a monster fly my presencethus.
What wicked and dissemblingglass of mine
made me compare with Hermia'ssphery eyne?
But who is here?
Lysander on the ground!
Dead?
Or asleep?
I see no blood, no wound.
Lysander, if you live, good sir,awake.
And run through fire will I forthy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena!
Nature shows art,
that through thy bosom makes mesee thy heart.
Where is Demetrius?
Oh, how fit a word is that vilename to perish on my sword.
Do not say so, Lysander.
Say not so what though he loveyour Hermia?
Lord, what though?
Yet Hermia still loves you, thenbe content.
Content with Hermia.
No, I do repent the tediousminutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven fora dove?
The will of man is by his reasonswayed.
And reason says you are theworthier maid.
Things growing are not ripeuntil their season,
so I, being young, till now ripenot to reason.
And touching now the point ofhuman skill,
reason becomes the marshal to mywill
and leads me to your eyes,
where I o'erlook love's storieswritten in love's richest book.
Wherefore was I to this keenmockery born?
When at your hand did I deservethis scorn?
It's not enough-- it's notenough, young man,
that I did never, no, nor nevercan,
deserve a sweet look fromDemetrius' eye,
but you must flout myinsufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong.
Good sooth, you do, in suchdisdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well.
Perforce, I must confess
I thought you lord of more truegentleness.
Oh, that a lady, of one manrefused
should of another therefore beabused.
She sees not Hermia.
Hermia, sleep thou there
and never mayst thou comeLysander near.
For all my powers, address yourlove and might
to honour Helen and to be herknight.
Ay me, for pity!
What a dream was here.
Lysander, look how I do quakewith fear.
Methought a serpent ate my heartaway
and you sat smiling at his cruelpray.
Lysander?
What, removed?
Lysander!
Lord!
What, out of hearing?
Gone?
No sound,
no word?
Alack, where are you?
Speak, and if you hear,
speak, of all loves.
I swoon almost with fear.
No?
Then I well perceive you are notnigh.
Either death or you I'll findimmediately.